[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment."
This is your go-to show
that offers practical tips
from expert guests at
the end of every episode
to help you be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
Today, more than ever, the
rise of the female power
seems to be awakening.
But what does that mean exactly?
The imbalance of masculine
energy so prevalent
in patriarchal systems
is being questioned.
But what would a matriarchal
system look like?
And how can we take steps to
get to a more balanced power
dynamic?
Several prestigious journals,
like "Forbes" and "Time
Magazine" are boldly
reporting with headlines
such as "The Future
is Female," placing
the voice of the feminine
message on a global stage.
Today my guest is the
great Sally Kempton.
In the '70s, Sally had
a flourishing career
as a New York
journalist, writing
on popular culture, the
arts, and feminist issues,
for "Esquire," "New
York Magazine,"
and the "Village Voice."
Today, Sally offers
a wide variety
of classes on moving through
psychological obstructions
and applying spiritual
principles to relationships,
work, and life.
Sally, thanks so much
for being here today.
>> It's a total
pleasure, Ashleigh.
>> So I know this is a
topic super near and dear
to your heart, being that
you have been writing on some
of these concepts
for many, many years.
And the conversation is big
again in modern culture.
And I think there's actually
a lot of controversy
around what it actually means.
>> Yeah, first of all, we are
starting to recognize that when
we talk about
masculine and feminine,
we are actually not talking
about people in male bodies
and people in female bodies,
and the confusion about that is,
I think, being
cleared up these days.
Because traditionally,
we've tended
to assume that what we call
masculine qualities are
essentially associated with
the male sexual anatomy.
In other words, men are
phallic, they thrust--
sorry for this
language, but they
thrust forward into action.
Whereas women sexual anatomy
is a space, a womb, a hole.
And therefore, the feminine
is understood to be receptive,
passive, not acting
in the world.
And somehow, masculine
has been associated
with strength, assertion,
domination, feminine
with passivity, receptivity,
and nourishment.
And we're starting to realize
that these qualities exist
in the universe.
The receptive quality
is not confined
to people in female bodies.
The assertive quality
is not confined
to people in male bodies.
And we're starting to
really look at, OK,
what do we mean when we
say masculine energy?
What do we mean when
we say feminine energy?
And that, to me, is the
most interesting part
of the conversation.
>> Yeah, I think so too, and
with everything happening
in the world today
with, finally,
a much more broad recognition
of gender, gender equality,
gender identification, and
really what does that mean when
we talk about these energies as
being masculine and feminine.
You always describe it as
trans personal qualities,
as they go far beyond not
even just the physical body
or sexual anatomy, but
even beyond personality
characteristics as well.
>> And what we call traditional
masculine qualities,
which would be assertion,
the capacity for independent
action, autonomy, leadership,
the sense of being the ruler
of the family and the ruler of
the state, which is, of course,
what traditional
patriarchy consists of.
Whereas, the woman is again
traditionally seen as the space
within which action happens.
So the woman is
identified with the earth,
the man is identified
with the sky, with spirit.
Woman is identified
with the body,
the masculine is
identified with intellect.
So there's this sense of a
split between the active, which
is identified with the
male, and the passive, which
is identified with the female.
And what we now know
is that it's actually
not like that at all, that
men, people in male bodies,
can be receptive, can be
nurturing, can be vulnerable.
And that people in female
bodies can be assertive,
can be leaders, can
have a strength that
seems to be very similar
to masculine strength,
can go into combat,
can do physical tasks
that for generations we
thought were only for men.
So we're starting
to realize that
these traditional qualities,
like assertion and receptivity
are not really
anchored to gender.
And they're not really
anchored to our hormones
or our physical equipment,
even though they obviously
have a lot to do with how our
biochemistry is operating.
The qualities that I think
we'd like to talk about
and that we really need
to bring into balance
have something to do
with bringing together
the sense of self-awareness,
consciousness, the ability
to abstract from
the physical world,
and give direction
to our experience,
which has traditionally been
called a masculine quality.
And the capacity to be open,
receptive, nourishment,
to create a kind of holding
space within which action can
happen, and kind of
heart based compassion,
which have traditionally been
regarded as feminine qualities.
I think what's more important
now, what's most important now,
is to understand how
a man can bring forth
his own nurturance, his
capacity for vulnerability,
a woman can bring
forth assertiveness
that's not overly aggressive--
>> Right.
>> --and how we live
as human beings,
who have a combination
of these qualities,
that that's really the
question that we're facing now.
>> Well, I think that's a really
important and big point too,
because being in a woman's
body and being very connected
to female aspect of my identity.
I would say that
I, most of my life,
been more identified
with my masculine energy
in a lot of ways.
I'm pretty fiery.
I will go and get things done.
And I've no problem
kind of being
in this linear,
like power forward.
And I actually identified
for such a long time,
once I understood those,
that, oh, this is a problem.
I need to chill out.
I need to soften down.
I need to not express this
masculine side so much.
I need to actually
really be connected
to who I am as a woman,
which isn't incorrect,
but I think that still keeps
us stuck in this paradigm as
of one or the other.
>> Right.
>> And that we need to
connect with one or the other,
or that we even just
need to balance them out.
>> Yeah.
>> But I think it's a
little bit more, actually,
that both of these qualities,
and all of the aspects that
these qualities
hold within them,
all exist within each
of us, and, therefore,
within the world around us.
And so it's not so much
even a balancing of these.
It's a being present
to or an embodying
both at the same time.
>> Yeah, that's
beautifully said.
And what you said about
identifying yourself
with masculine qualities is,
I think, a characteristic
of educated contemporary
women, that once women
started being
seriously educated,
and started holding
jobs, that the way
we knew how to do it was the
way that the men in our lives
had done it.
So I would say
women are learning
how to be powerful, assertive,
linear, get things done,
be efficient, and also
be receptive, embodied,
and literally stay
in our hearts,
stay in our interior, which
is the thing that men kind
of didn't figure out, which is
how we got into this imbalance
in the first place.
And that women, as
the feminist movement
came to the fore, one
of the first things
that feminists
realized was, oh, we
can do anything a man can do.
>> Right.
>> So women began to nurture the
qualities traditionally called
masculine.
And then, men said, but I
don't like it when women are
so assertive,
because it doesn't--
they're not creating the space
that I need to feel held.
So what we're
beginning to realize,
I'm certainly
is that we all need
to be held, we all
need that holding space that's
been traditionally called
feminine.
And we all need assertion,
we all need strength,
protection, and the
ability to lead.
>> Yeah.
>> So what do we do to free
these qualities in ourselves?
I actually think
it's a life work
to learn how to be
appropriately aggressive
and how to be appropriately
receptive, how
to find the situations, in which
it's important to be linear,
forge ahead, and where
it's important to hold
back and allow.
>> Right.
>> And these are human--
these are human issues.
They're not really men's
issues or women's issues.
>> Or even masculine
or feminine issues.
>> Or masculine or
feminine issues.
>> When we're talking those
trans-personal energies.
>> Exactly.
>> Because this brings
up another topic,
which is this idea that--
and this is very popular
in modern culture
right now, like
we must tear down
the patriarchy and this
imbalanced masculinity,
we must take it down, and the
rise of the feminine energy.
>> Right.
>> And we're seeing that in
such a kind of aggressive
and combative way, which
ultimately is actually just
women acting in the patriarchy.
>> Yeah.
>> Or the feminine energy kind
of taking on those qualities
of the masculine energies, but
in the guise of femininity,
because of the revolution.
And I know you have some
things to say about that, which
I think is really important.
And we asked that
question in the beginning,
what would a matriarchal
system look like?
>> Well, I want to say
that I don't think we want
a matriarchal system any more
than we want a patriarchal
system.
Because both those words,
they imply hierarchy.
They imply domination.
>> And difference.
>> Me and you, and separation.
>> Exactly.
>> But patriarchy implies
men are in charge.
Matriarchy implies
women are in charge.
And there's something-- I mean,
we all-- most of us anyway,
grow up as children in
matriarchy, not everybody,
but generally speaking.
Our mothers run our childhood.
So we know what it feels like
to have a dominant female figure
telling us what to do
and we know how we feel,
both protected and pissed off.
So to a certain
extent, we grow up
and we rebel against matriarchy.
That's part of
human individuation.
And so when we think about
creating a new society,
I would say that it's
always in the model of what
it was like to be a child with
all-powerful parents who force
you to do things you
didn't want to do,
and our understanding
of patriarchy
is based on it being men who
make the laws and tell us
what to do.
>> Right.
>> The idea of matriarchy
is based on, oh, my god,
am I going to be a child again
and my mother's bossing me
around.
And they're both kind of scary.
>> Sure.
>> But because we're
comfortable with patriarchy,
that is with the idea of
the president being a man,
of the head of the
corporation being a man,
so many of us are not
comfortable with female
authority.
And so there is a
political aspect of it,
where we're now at that time
where it's been important,
and it's been going on
for the last 100 years,
where women, to agitate for
equal pay, and the right
to be in a workplace
without being sexualized,
all the different
political aspects of what
we could call gender politics
that we're working out now.
>> Yeah.
>> But on the other hand,
we're not going to solve
the fundamental con of human
life if we just try to do it
a sociopolitical level, because
what it's really about is
the improper use of power, and
how we call that out in others,
but especially in ourselves.
And what comes to me
when I think about this
is something that
Scott Peck, who
was a very, very smart
psychotherapist, Christian,
who wrote a book called,
"People of the Lie," which
is about evil.
And he defined evil
as using your power
to avoid spiritual
growth, which I think
is the most brilliant
definition of that concept
that we call evil
as I've ever heard.
Because if you look at yourself,
at the situations in which, you
know, you've done
something unkind,
or you've pushed
somebody else around,
it's almost always
because we don't
want to admit our
own limitations
or our own vulnerability.
So we use our power to
make ourselves right
or to make ourselves
the winners.
>> Or because it's scary.
>> Or because it's so scary.
>> Yeah.
>> So that's the question,
I think that yoga addresses,
that you and I are most
interested in, how do we grow
spiritually in these
challenging situations?
Because in order to right
the imbalance, each of us
has to be willing to
take responsibility
for our own
relationship with power.
>> Yeah.
>> And the truth is with--
I'm going to say something that
maybe sounds fairly radical,
but women are socialized
to get approval
and to be beautiful,
to be protected,
to be alluring and attractive.
And men are socialized to
be winners and successful.
So nowadays, women are
also being socialized
to be assertive and successful.
And yet, women want to hold
on to our feminine power
of attractiveness.
So we get very mixed up about
when to yield and when to push.
And, of course, this
happens in the family,
it happens in the workplace.
It happens-- it's, I think,
the source of the confusion
that women are experiencing.
And men feel that
they are not receiving
the nurturance and the space
that they need in order
to succeed, because the life
of a man in this society
is very tough.
>> Yeah.
>> It's just as tough, if
not more so, than the life
of a woman.
We both have our problems.
Both genders have
serious, serious things
they have to work through.
So the question really is how
can we support each other?
How can we discover
what it means
to be-- to live
with an open heart
and yet be realists about
how we live our lives?
>> Sure.
OK, so these are lots
of really big topics.
And, of course, we could talk
about this for probably days.
But in these confusing
times, and when
so many of these
fundamental beliefs
are starting to be reorganized
and we have the ability
to really question paradigms
we've grown up with,
socializations
structures we've
grown up with, what
are some specific things
that we can do to start to--
I like what you said about
not necessarily having
a matriarchal
leadership or culture.
But what are some things we
can actually do right now
to begin to integrate both
the matriarchal, patriarchal,
masculine and feminine
qualities into our daily life,
within us, because it
really is about us bringing
the balance and the awareness
of those energies within us
more than anything.
>> Yeah, I mean, obviously, one
thing that really is important
is that we be able to talk
about difficult issues.
So the ability to
set up a conversation
and create a space for a
conversation in which nobody
is being judged for their--
let's call it politically,
socially, academically correct
perspectives, but in
which people can really
be open about where they
are, where they're confused,
is a big part of it.
And I think it's part
of what we're doing now.
But to some large
extent, it feels to me
like we need to be able to
be honest with ourselves
about our feelings
of vulnerability,
about the fact that we
don't have it together,
and we're desperately trying to
act like we have it together.
So we need to learn how to find
spaces, interior spaces, spaces
for ourselves, where we
can ask these questions.
And we need ways to hold one
another in those safe spaces.
So that a man can say, I feel
really vulnerable when I'm not
making it to the top
of my profession,
or I feel bad that
I've just lost my job
and I don't know how I'm
going to support my family.
And this goes to my
feeling of my own manhood.
And a woman needs to be
able to say, I'm aging,
and I don't feel so
pretty, and therefore, I
feel less feminine.
In other words, we
need to have space
to discuss the myths of
masculine and feminine,
and come to the place where
we can start to see, OK,
who am I as a human being?
How is my interior capacity
for nourishing others
being activated in my life?
How can I be more
assertive in the situations
I'm in, without being
overly aggressive?
How can I, as a woman, make
it clear what I want and need,
without being a nagging bitch?
And how can I as a man say,
I'm working really hard,
and I actually need support,
without coming across
as a patriarchal bastard?
So you know what I mean?
I like to some extent,
in our communication,
we need to notice our rage,
and our hurt, and our fear,
and hold space for it.
And that's a feminine quality,
that capacity to hold space.
And I think that when we
talk about how the future is
feminine, I feel that
what we're really saying
is that our society needs
a capacity for holding
space for each other, for
compassion, that it needs
to be not just done by women.
The emotional labor
of holding space
needs to also be
done by both genders,
because in a certain
sense, that's
what's going to allow
new paradigms to emerge.
And so that's the way I
think the future is feminine,
by our really
understanding what it
is to be present
with each other,
to feel into presence
within ourselves,
and to connect to the
presence in us and in others.
And to do that, we actually
do need to go inside.
We need to pay
attention to our breath.
And we need to meditate,
to actually experience
our consciousness turning
backwards, feeling
into our own body,
where there is
space, where there
is compassion,
where there is kindness.
Once we're able to accept the
fact that we can bring it out
from inside.
>> Right.
>> And I would say
that's the feminine work.
>> Yeah, because the
feminist movement,
or I should say actually the
overemphasis on the masculine
or the patriarchy, this is
probably contentious for some
people, but it hasn't
just happened to women.
>> No, exactly.
>> It's happened to men too.
>> Yeah.
>> And so these techniques that
we're talking about and this
ability to hold space,
and to connect with that,
and to be able to really
acknowledge what's going
on within us, is not just
something that women have
the right to do or need to
do, but also that men have
the right to do, to process,
and the need to do as well.
So when we talk about these,
it's for men, and women,
and all of the energies
working within us.
>> Yeah, and Warren
Farrell, who's a theorist--
he's a gender theorists, always
says that women have choices.
A woman can-- and this is not
true of all women, obviously,
but middle class women--
have more choices than men.
It's OK for women to take
time and work on ourselves.
It's very, very difficult
for men to do that,
because of how
men are expected--
>> Expectations.
>> Yeah, so if we could allow
men to be more like women
in that way, it would allow
women to be more like men
in ways that women need
to be more like men.
And somehow, we
will find a place
where we're all just
human, which seems
to be where we want to go.
>> Yeah.
Well, Sally, would you
mind enlightening us
with a tip or two that
anyone can do, really
at any time throughout
the day, to start
to work on harmonizing these
energies within ourself
and the world around us?
>> Sure, I'd love to.
So what I'm about to say is
very, very basic meditation
practice, the practice
of turning within.
And it has to do
with the breath.
And the reason I want to talk
about this practice as opposed
to the many, many other
practices we could talk about,
is because this is
the bottom line.
So what we have
to do is actually
discover the inner
source of the breath.
And if you follow your breath,
what you will start to notice
is that the diaphragm,
this muscle that
runs across the bottom
of your rib cage,
is actually rising and
falling with the breath.
And if you allow
yourself to tune
into the diaphragm
as your breathing,
you begin to
recognize that breath
starts from inside the body.
We think that
breath is something
you take in from outside
through your nostrils.
In fact, the gesture of
breathing starts inside.
And if you're focused here in
this region, between the heart
and the solar plexus,
and allowing the breath
to come in while your
focus remains there,
something opens up
in your inner body.
And you start to recognize that
there's a wisdom and a power
that you're carrying
inside you that
is deeper than the
mind, which is literally
the source of your breath,
which is your own life force.
And that's where true power is.
That power is fearless.
In other words,
it can hold steady
in the middle of the most
challenging external situation.
And it's all about
learning to find
the source of your own breath,
which we do by literally
following the breath, until
we can discern the place where
the breath starts.
And then letting it rise,
fill our lungs, go out,
do what it does,
and then coming back
to that place which is the
source of the inhalation.
It will, over time, change your
whole relationship to yourself.
And then when you
act, when you speak,
when you interact
with others, it
will be from a place
of interior connection.
And you'll be able to find
that same interior connection
in other people.
And it's at that
point that we start
to realize what
human equality really
is, what the connection
between you and your wife,
and you and the tree, and you
and the person next to you
on the bus really is, which is
to say aliveness, awareness,
energy, breath, we all have it.
And that's where the balance is.
>> Well, Sally, as always,
thank you so much for being here
and offering your
grounded wisdom.
It's always a pleasure
to be with you.
>> Totally, Ashleigh, and thank
you so much for what you do.
>> You're most welcome.
And thank you for joining us.
I hope these tips have
been helpful to you.
Have a beautiful
rest of your day
and I will see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]